MKBINGRAM(1)                                                      MKBINGRAM(1)



NAME
       mkbingram - make binary N-gram from two arpa LMs

SYNOPSIS
       mkbingram 2gram.arpa rev3gram.arpa bingram

DESCRIPTION
       mkbingram  makes  a  binary N-gram file for Julius from word 2-gram and
       reverse word 3-gram LMs in ARPA  standard  format.   Using  the  binary
       file, the initial startup of Julius becomes much faster.

       Note  that the word 2-gram and reverse word 3-gram should be trained in
       the same corpus, same parameters (i.e. cut-off thresholds) and have the
       same vocabulary.

       mkbingram can read gzipped ARPA file.

       mkbingram  that  comes  with  Julius version 3.5 and later can generate
       more size-optimized binary N-gram by using 24bit index instead of 32bit
       and  2-gram  backoff data compression.  The byte order was also changed
       from 3.5 to use the system's native order by default.

       Although the old binary N-gram can be directly read by Julius, (in that
       case  Julius  performs  on-line  conversion),  you can also update your
       binary N-gram using mkbingram using -d option.

       Please note that binary N-gram file converted by mkbingram  of  version
       3.5 and later cannot be read by Julius/Julian 3.4.2 and earlier.

OPTIONS
       2gram.arpa
              input word 2-gram file in ARPA standard format.

       rev3gram.arpa
              input reverse word 3-gram in ARPA standard format.

       -d old_bingram
              input binary N-gram file (for conversion from old format).

       bingram
              output binary N-gram file.

EXAMPLE
       Convert ARPA files to binary format:

           % mkbingram ARPA_2gram ARPA_rev_3gram outfile

       Convert old binary N-gram file to new format:

           % mkbingram -d old_bingram new_bingram


USAGE
       You can specify the generated binary N-gram file on Julius/Julian using
       option "-d".

SEE ALSO
       julius(1)

VERSION
       This version is provided as part of Julius-3.5.1.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright (c) 1991-2006 Kawahara Lab., Kyoto University
       Copyright (c) 2000-2005 Shikano Lab., Nara  Institute  of  Science  and
       Technology
       Copyright  (c) 2005-2006 Julius project team, Nagoya Institute of Tech-
       nology

AUTHORS
       LEE Akinobu (Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan)
       contact: julius@kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp

LICENSE
       Same as Julius.



4.3 Berkeley Distribution            LOCAL                        MKBINGRAM(1)
